So in this video,
we'll going to talk about graph analytics
within the context of this
big data specialization.
So in the previous courses you know about
the three important V's of big data.
So the three well-known V's are volume,
velocity, and variety.
We will also talk about a lesser-known V,
which is called valence.
Okay, what we want to talk about is,
what impact these things
have on graph data.
So for volume, let's take a dataset like
the load network of the United States.
Well, that's a pretty large graph.
So when we say volume,
I mean that the size of the graph
is much larger than what you might have
in the memory of a reasonable computer or
real computing infrastructure.
Now, we will see what impact the size
of the graph has on analytic operations.
What we mean by velocity
when it comes to graphs?
Well, think of Facebook again.
So these little graphs are updates.
So you write a post, then like somebody
else's post, and make a comment.
That's a bunch of updates.
That comes and adds to your graph.
Well, then ten minutes later,
you do something similar, and
that also comes and adds to the graph.
Then your friend does the same thing,
it adds to your graph.
So as time goes by,
you are sending more edges to your graph.
And the speed at which
you are doing this for
at least like Facebook can be really,
really high.
So the rate of update in
Facebook is really high.
This is what is called
streaming edges into graphs.
And there can be multiple streams for
various reasons.
What do we mean by variety?
For graphs, it means that the graph is
collecting data from various places.
And all these different places are giving
different kinds of information to
the graph.
So in the end,
the graph has more non-uniform and
complex information potentially
coming from multiple sources.
That's what we mean by variety
when we refer to graphs.
That picture there, by the way, is
different kinds of protein interactions.
The next one,
the less-known one is valence.
Now, if you remember your chemistry,
this comes from valence electrons,
which are electrons in an atom
which are used for bonding.
The other electrons
are called core electrons.
So the idea is if we increase
the valence of the graphs,
you increase the connectiveness
of the graph.
How, we will see.
Now, graph size clearly impacts analytics.
Why, a, it takes more space, but more
importantly, it increases the algorithmic
complexity of any operation that
you want it to on the graph.
Now, we'll see an example of that,
but what happens as
a result is that the data-to-analysis
time becomes high.
So I put in some data, and
I wanted to do this analysis.
But there is so much data, that my
analysis takes way longer than it should.
Let's give a simple example,
an example we have seen before.
Remember, we had this little graph
from our biological example where we
were asking, find a simple path between
Alzheimer's Disease and Colorectal Cancer.
And in this case, the result is obvious.
Now, let's pause and ask.
There are two nodes that I mentioned,
in this case,
my Colorectal Cancer and
Alzheimer's Disease nodes.
And we are asking,
is there a simple path connecting them?
This is called a decision problem.
I give you a data, and I'm asking does
such a simple path exist or not exist?
But this is actually a very
hard decision problem.
And the computer scientists will tell you
that this is a very complicated problem
because it has a very high complexity.
Let's ask another question.
Well, how many simple paths,
now I want to count.
How many simple paths exist
between these two nodes?
Indeed, it is another
hard computing problem.
And if you really want to know,
the size of the result,
in the worst case is exponential
in the number of nodes.
So if we increase the number of nodes and
edges, if we increase the size of
the graph such a seemingly simple question
can take a very, very, very long time.
So that it's almost practically
impossible to compute it for
a really large graph if we have
no other information supporting.
That's the worst case.
But when we say algorithmic complexity
increases, that's what we mean.
Let's talk about velocity, and
I said our favorite example is Facebook.
So we are adding a bunch of updates, which
means we are adding a bunch of edges.
We are streaming the edges into the data,
and we want to compute a metric.
We want to see what is
the shortest distance
between person a and
person b or item a and item b.
Or I want to know that
Facebook has communities.
Twitter has communities like we saw.
And how many people out there,
in these communities, and
how many such communities are there,
like a Facebook group?
Now, if you want to compute this metric,
and you get this
edges very fast, it is very difficult
to know when you have the answer.
Because you are going to get an increasing
number of edges in the system,
and you keep computing this metric that
you want to find the answer for, and
it will turn out that your continuous
stream does not fit in memory.
Because your memory is limited
compared to the amount of
edges, or edge updates you
are streaming into the system.
So that's what's happened when you
have high velocity information.
Very soon, your memory runs out,
and you want to compute
your answer right now from
the data that you have.
Okay, let's look at variety,
also known as heterogeneity.
There are two aspects of heterogeneity.
One, we have already mentioned, graph data
is often created through integration,
like we saw in the case of the biology.
And therefore, the variety comes because
the nature of data is very different.
Also, they may not be all
the same kind of data.
For example, the data may come
from a relational database,
it may come from an XML database.
It may come from another graph.
It may come from a document.
It may even come from complex
things like social networks,
like citation networks between papers or
patents, between interaction networks,
between web entities,
which are connected through links.
And from human knowledge that has been
represented as graphs through ontologists.
So all of these graphs, the nodes and
the edges do not mean the same thing.
And somehow in there,
you need to capture what it means to have
an edge because that will determine
what you can do with the edge.
A simple example, in an ontology,
is something that says a is a b,
and b is a c, so a is a c.
The a is a c is an inference that you do,
given the other two relationships.
What would be an example?
My pet is a dog, and the dog is a mammal,
therefore, my pet is a mammal.
You want to do inferences for
some edges likes is a.
Now, you need to know this.
You do not do this with the biology
example where you are looking at genes and
proteins because that operation does
not make sense when you have genes and
proteins.
So therefore, every graph may
have a different semantics.
And what happens with variety is
the number of sub-semantics and
the number of valid
operations that you can do.
That changes, and
that becomes more complex.
Now, valence I said,
is about connectedness.
It is also about
interdependency among data.
So if I have a higher valence which means,
I have more data elements that
are more strongly related, and
these relationships can be exploited.
In most cases,
the part where valence becomes important,
is that it increases over time, which
means, parts of the graph becomes denser,
and the average distance
between node pairs decreases.
Let me show you, here is my Gmail.
And I have plotted my Gmail graphs
from 2006 to about two months back.
When I first started using it,
I had these users,
a very few users, and
they are not really related.
Now with time, more and
more people started communicating
with me through Gmail.
And more and more of these people were
also talking amongst themselves and
copying me and responding to me.
By the end, you would see that
you can find dense groups
within my Gmail because
the information and
the connectedness between people have
evolved and become more dense over time.
This is the phenomenon of valence, and
this is very important to study because
you want to study things like, what parts
of the graph have become more dense?
And why have they become more dense?
Maybe something was going on.
Maybe there was an event that
brought these people together,
and you want to analyze that and
find that out from your graph analytics.
That's why you want to understand
the effect of valence.
You also want to understand what do I do
if the graph becomes very, very dense
in a place, so that finding a path through
that dense space becomes very hard.
You will see in a later video that when
this happens, the computer system,
that is trying to process these graphs in
a parallel and distributed way has to do
something special to handle these
increasing density in parts of the graph.